# acCRISPR: An activity-correction method for improving CRISPR screen accuracy

acCRISPR is a tool developed in Python 3 for analyzing genome-wide CRISPR screens to identify essential genes for growth as well as significant hits for stress tolerance by removing low-activity sgRNA based on an activity cutoff. acCRISPR optimizes library activity and coverage to improve hit calling and screen accuracy. 

## System requirements
acCRISPR can be implemented on any desktop computer running macOS or Linux. The tool has been tested on Linux: Ubuntu 20.04.

## Dependencies
acCRISPR requires Python version 3.6 or higher and the following Python libraries to be installed:
- `numpy (>=1.18.1)`
- `scipy (>=1.4.1)`
- `matplotlib (>=3.4.2)`
- `statsmodels (>=0.12.0)`

## Installation
Steps:
1. Clone this repository: `git clone https://github.com/ianwheeldon/acCRISPR.git`
2. Navigate to acCRISPR directory: `cd acCRISPR`
3. Install the Python package: `pip install .`

Provided all dependencies have already been installed, acCRISPR installation usually takes only about 1-2 mins. After executing the above steps, installation of the package can be confirmed by launching Python3 on the terminal and running `import acCRISPR`. If this results in no error, the package was installed correctly.

## Running acCRISPR on example datasets

*(Note: For the purposes of acCRISPR implementation, 'FS' denotes fitness score when analyzing growth screen data and tolerance score when analyzing stress tolerance screen data)*

acCRISPR implementation on 3 example datasets has been demonstrated here. The first two examples, pertaining to analysis of stress tolerance screen data in *Yarrowia lipolytica*, have been provided for the purposes of testing the source code by users on an external sample dataset (pH 3 dataset in Example 1) and an internal dataset (1500mM NaCl dataset in Example 2). Example 3 (*Y. lipolytica* Cas12a growth screening dataset) is used to demonstrate the use of acCRISPR to perform essential gene analysis for a given screening dataset.

### Example 1: Implementation on the pH 3 dataset from *Yarrowia lipolytica* tolerance screens

Navigate to the directory containing source code: `cd src/acCRISPR`

Copy test input files into this directory: `cp ../../example_data/pH3/*.tab .`

acCRISPR can be run for the original/uncorrected sgRNA library using the following command (run time ~ 7-10 mins):
```
python3 run_acCRISPR.py --counts pH3_counts_final.tab --replicate_info pH3_rep_file.tab --cov 6 --significance 2-tailed --output_prefix pH3_no_cutoff
```
The input files used in the above example can be found in the `pH3` directory within `example_data`.

- `--counts` is used to specify the file containing raw sgRNA counts for all replicates of each sample used in the screening experiment. The first and second columns specify the guide identifiers and associated gene names respectively, and the subsequent columns contain information on raw counts for each sgRNA in each sample replicate.
- `--replicate_info` contains information for mapping replicates to samples. The names of replicates in this file and their order should exactly match the column headers (for replicates) and their order (from left to right) in the file specified by `--counts`. If different controls are used for determining CS & FS, this file should contain 4 unique sample names - `Control_CS`, `Treatment_CS`, `Control_FS` & `Treatment_FS`. However, if a common control sample is used for both CS & FS estimation, only 3 unique sample names are needed - `Control`, `Treatment_CS` & `Treatment_FS`.
- `--cov` is used to provide the coverage (avg. no. of sgRNA per gene) of the original library, rounded off to the nearest integer. In the given example, the original library contains 46395 unique sgRNA targeting 7854 genes in the genome. Hence, the library coverage would be 5.91, which can be rounded off to 6.
- `--output_prefix` specifies the prefix for output file names (eg. after running the above command, the names of output files generated by acCRISPR would start with "pH3_no_cutoff").

For brief information on all input parameters to acCRISPR: `python3 run_acCRISPR.py -h`

If CS and FS of sgRNA have been pre-calculated, CS & FS (i.e., log2-fc) calculation can be skipped and the file containing CS & FS values can be provided directly as input to acCRISPR. In order to skip log2-fc calculation, the parameter `--skip_log2fc_calc` needs to be `True`.
```
python3 run_acCRISPR.py --skip_log2fc_calc --CS_FS_file CS_FS_values.tab --cov 6 --significance 2-tailed --output_prefix pH3_no_cutoff
```
In the above command, the filename specified for the parameter `--CS_FS_file` (i.e., `CS_FS_values.tab`) should contain CS and FS values of sgRNA. This file should be in the same format as `pH3_no_cutoff_guide_CS_FS.tab` found in the directory `pH3_no_cutoff` within `example_results`.

To run acCRISPR on the example pH 3 dataset with a CS-corrected library at a threshold of 5.0 & providing raw sgRNA counts as input, the `--cutoff` parameter should be set to 5.0, as in the command below:
```
python3 run_acCRISPR.py --counts pH3_counts_final.tab --replicate_info pH3_rep_file.tab --cov 6 --cutoff 5.0 --significance 2-tailed --output_prefix pH3_5.0
```
Alternatively, acCRISPR can be implemented for a corrected library by skipping CS & FS calculation from raw counts and providing CS & FS of sgRNA from the original/uncorrected library as input instead of the raw counts file. For the given example dataset, once acCRISPR has been implemented with the uncorrected library, it generates a file named `pH3_no_cutoff_guide_CS_FS.tab`, which can be provided as input to generate results at a threshold of 5.0 using the `--CS_FS_file` parameter. In addition, the parameter `--skip_log2fc_calc` needs to be `True`.
```
python3 run_acCRISPR.py --skip_log2fc_calc --CS_FS_file pH3_no_cutoff_guide_CS_FS.tab --cov 6 --cutoff 5.0 --significance 2-tailed --output_prefix pH3_5.0
```

acCRISPR provides the following output files:

- A TAB delimited file containing CS and FS of sgRNA in the corrected library (if a CS threshold is provided & `--skip_log2fc_calc` is `True`) or uncorrected library (if no CS threshold is provided). The file contains 4 columns - sgRNA ID, associated gene name, CS & FS. (If a CS threshold is provided but `--skip_log2fc_calc` is `False`, 2 separate files containing CS & FS of uncorrected and corrected libraries are output.)
- A TAB delimited file containing (uncorrected or corrected, depending on whether a threshold is provided) FS of all genes covered by the library. The file contains 2 columns - gene name & gene FS.
- A TAB delimited file containing raw and corrected p-values of all genes. The file contains 4 columns - gene name, gene FS, raw p-value and corrected p-value.*
- A PNG file showing the null distribution plot and corresponding null distribution parameters (mean & S.D.), as well as the number of sgRNA used per pseudogene to create this null distribution.*
- A text file containing information about the number of significant genes, average coverage of the uncorrected/corrected library, and the value of ac-coefficient.*

<b><i>*Since the algorithm for hit identification by acCRISPR involves random sampling, the null distribution S.D. and hence, the p-values of genes and no. of significant genes would vary slightly with each run of the tool.</i></b>

Output files obtained from runs on this example dataset with the uncorrected and corrected (threshold = 5.0) libraries can be found in `pH3_no_cutoff` and `pH3_cutoff_5.0` directories respectively (within the directory `example_results`).

### Example 2: Implementation on the 1500 mM NaCl tolerance screening dataset from *Y. lipolytica*

From the `acCRISPR` home directory, navigate to the directory containing source code: `cd src/acCRISPR`

Copy test input files into this directory: `cp ../../example_data/1500NaCl/*.tab .`

To run acCRISPR on this dataset with a CS-corrected library at a threshold of 1.5 & a 2-tailed test, use the following command:
```
python3 run_acCRISPR.py --counts 1500NaCl_counts_final.tab --replicate_info 1500NaCl_rep_file.tab --cov 6 --cutoff 1.5 --significance 2-tailed --output_prefix 1500NaCl_1.5
```

Output files obtained from this run can be found in the `1500NaCl_cutoff_1.5` directory (within the directory `example_results`).

### Example 3: Implementation on the Cas12a growth screening dataset from *Y. lipolytica*

The raw Cas12a library has an average coverage of 7, when rounded off to the nearest integer. This dataset is used for essential gene identification and hence, a 1-tailed test will need to be performed in this case.

From the `acCRISPR` home directory, navigate to the directory containing source code: `cd src/acCRISPR`

Copy test input files into this directory: `cp ../../example_data/Cas12a/*.tab .`

To run acCRISPR on this dataset with a CS-corrected library at a threshold of 0.5, use the following command:
```
python3 run_acCRISPR.py --counts Cas12a_counts_final.tab --replicate_info Cas12a_rep_file.tab --cov 7 --cutoff 0.5 --output_prefix Cas12a_0.5
```

Output files obtained from this run can be found in the `Cas12a_cutoff_0.5` directory (within the directory `example_results`).


## Scripts for library design and sequencing read processing
Custom MATLAB scripts that were used for the design of the CRISPR-Cas9 and -Cas12a libraries in *Y. lipolytica* and processing of Illumina sequencing reads to generate sgRNA abundance for both Cas9 and Cas12a screens can be found within four separate subdirectories in `MATLAB_scripts_genome_wide_CRISPR_screens_Y_lipolytica`. Each subdirectory contains a detailed `instructions_for_use.txt` file that the user is encouraged to read before implementing the scripts.



## Citation
If you use acCRISPR, please cite the following article:-

Ramesh, A., Trivedi, V., Lee, S. et al. acCRISPR: an activity-correction method for improving the accuracy of CRISPR screens. Commun Biol 6, 617 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-023-04996-8
